---
title: The Padres have too many outfielders
date: "2015-05-06T23:46:37.121Z"
description: "The Padres are young and talented. Here's why that might be a bad thing."
---

Is there any truth to the timeless American idiom "Too much of a good thing"? It depends. I'd be more than happy to have too much money, or too many friends. However when it comes to the Padres' outfield – we have a classic example of too much of a good thing.

Writing the words "Padres", "good" and "thing" in the same sentence felt as weird writing as I'm sure it did while reading, but for the first time in years the Padres have a categorically good team. It's been a long time coming for Friars fans — the last time the team made the playoffs was thirteen years ago. Only two teams: the Miami Marlins and my hometown Seattle Mariners have a longer stretch of missing the post season.

If I was a betting man, I'd pick the Padres to move off of this list sooner than both the Mariners and the Marlins. The Mariners, who won 89 games last year and still finished way out of the wildcard race, [are cursed](https://thecomeback.com/mlb/the-seattle-mariners-really-might-be-cursed.html). And the Marlins are in full rebuild mode, having just traded two former M.V.Ps in a salary dump after Derek Jeter & friends [drastically overpaid](https://www.miamiherald.com/sports/spt-columns-blogs/barry-jackson/article191481449.html) for the unpopular franchise. And whose old President of Baseball Operations [literally told fans to go f**k](https://twitter.com/LeBatard_Reddit/status/1074852245655748608) themselves after completing the deal.
Meanwhile the Padres are a team chock-full of young, exciting talent and are trending in the right direction. The front office signed superstar third baseman Manny Machado to a blockbuster contract this spring. They also bucked conventional MLB front office wisdom by actually trying to put the best players in the organization on the team, regardless of service time considerations. As most baseball fans already know, 21 year old wunderkind Fernando Tatis Jr. was a surprise addition to the 25 man roster despite never having played above AA. Rookie Starter Chris Paddack and catcher Francisco Mejia also made the team coming out of spring training. An even more surprising move was the addition of lefty starting pitcher Nick Margevicius, the Padres #39 prospect who has only one year of high A ball under his belt.

Wether the latter says more about the questionable state of the team's starting pitching or the front office and their willingness to be aggressive with inexperienced prospects remains to be seen, but either way the Padres farm system was [ranked #1 for the second consecutive year](https://www.mlb.com/news/top-10-farm-systems-in-mlb?t=mlb-pipeline-coverage). It's probably safe to assume the major league team will have no shortage of talent flowing in from the minor league system from years to come.

This leads me to my next question, can too much young talent be a bad thing? In the case of the Padres' outfield I'd argue yes. It's easy to disregard this statement when taken at face value. 29 other MLB franchises are scratching and clawing to collect as much young, cheap, team controlled talent as possible. The Red Sox just won a world series with both corner outfield spots filled by players making less than one million dollars a year. These types of players are easily the most valuable in all of baseball. But I'd argue there are some subtle differences that make the Padres current situation less than ideal.

First off, the Padres have five outfielders under the age of 30 that are good enough to start on most other major league teams. At 28, Wil Meyers is the senior member of the group, and also the one who will receive the most consistent playing time. That leaves Hunter Renfroe, Franmil Reyes, Franchy Cordero and Manuel Margot to split time between the two spots not occupied by Meyers.

Margot is probably the best defender of the group, posting positive WAR in both 2017 and 2018 even though his WRC+ was below 90 both of those years. He seems to have a strangle hold on center field, starting nine of the first thirteen games of 2019 there. Although his defense keeps him in the lineup he is easily the worst hitter of the group.

Franchy Cordero is the [wildcard](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ecRytTfWL8Q) of the group. He posted the seventh highest average exit velocity and was first in average home run length in all of Major League Baseball in 2018. Yes you read that right, Francy Cordero was just behind the likes of Aaron Judge, Giancarlo Stanton and Nelson Cruz in terms of average exit velocity and LEAD THE LEAGUE in home run distance last year. Unfortunately his season was cut short due to an elbow injury. Somehow he posted a 109 WRC+ while striking out 37% of the time and walking only 9%. He's had a hot start in 2019 but was just sent to the disabled list with a sore elbow, the same injury that cut his season short last year. if he can get healthy and lower is strikeout percentage I can see him taking over full-time center field duties from Margot in the near future.

Hunter Renfroe is an anomaly. The former Padres #1 prospect has had plenty of struggles at the plate in the past, bouncing from AAA to the Majors multiple times while trying to figure out how to deal with Major League pitching. Luckily for the Friars he looks to have figured something out last year, posting a OPS over 800 and being good for 1.4 WAR. Currently he's building on his solid 2018 with a torrid start to 2019 — having already mashed 4 homeruns in limiting playing time.

This leaves us with Franchy Cordero, my favorite of the bunch. Why you may ask? Well he's an absolute unit, checking in at 6' 5" and 275 pounds. For context LeBron James is 6' 8" and weights 250 pounds. At 23, he is also the youngest of the group, even though by all accounts he is a full grown man who hits home runs like [this](https://www.mlb.com/cut4/franmil-reyes-hits-monster-homer-at-wrigley-field-c289060814) (477 feet) and [this](https://www.mlb.com/news/franmil-reyes-clubs-442-foot-mammoth-hr-in-win-c278929020) (442 feet). Although his large frame lends itself to poor defense (imagine David Ortiz trying to play the outfield) he posted a 129 WRC+ in 87 games last season, second of all five Padres outfielders behind Wil Meyers. Unfortunately, he only posted 1.2 WAR because apparently when you're 6' 5" and weigh as much as a freight train it can be hard to chase down fly balls.

The Padres find themselves in a difficult situation. Five plus outfielders, but none are superstars. Only one (Wil Meyers) is demonstrably better than the others to justify playing over the others every day. This leaves four players to fill two spots. What the Padres need is the DH in the National League, where Franmil would be able to bless us with his monster dongs without having to be bothered doing boring things like playing defense. But in leu of a fundamental change to the national league rules the team simply has too many good players and not enough playing time. I believe that each player could develop to good or even all-star level with enough consistent at-bats but it's almost impossible to see that happening with the team in its current state.

For what it's worth, the Padres seem to have recognized the issue and are experimenting with different line-ups. They tried to move Wil Meyers to center this spring which would open up left and right field for one of Reyes, Renfroe or Cordero. Unfortunately management didn't see enough solid defense out of him this spring to move him to the position full-time. So about once a week since the start of the season we've seen Meyers in center, with Renfroe in left and Reyes in right — their best hitting line-up with defense comparable to a beer league softball team. 

The injury to Franchy Cordero makes things easier for now as Reyes and Renfroe can split time in right on days Meyers doesn't play center. But once he gets healthy again the team is back to having a log jam where all four outfielders are good enough to play but none of them get enough playing time to develop effectively. Another option would be to send Cordero down to the minors for the time being. He needs the most additional development and coincidentally is the only one with minor league options left. 

The ideal situation is probably to trade one of the five to fill a bigger need for the team. The Padres are good this year and any good team needs more pitching to make a playoff run. Trading Franmil Reyes to the American League for pitching makes a ton of sense, since his skills are more valuable as a DH and he is an immediate upgrade over many AL teams current designated hitter.

So can there be too much of a good thing? Mostly no, but sometimes yes. In the case of the Padres young outfield the lack of consistent playing time for any the team's good, young outfielders is hampering their development and preventing them from becoming more than just good, young outfielders. With consistent playing time they could become great, but if the team keeps with the status quo, we will likely never see any of them achieve that greatness. The Padres should seriously consider demoting Franchy Cordero, or trading Franmil Reyes. This will benefit both the team, and the players themselves. 
